**This FMU was generated using UniFMU.
For general instructions on how to use the tool access the repository https://github.com/INTO-CPS-Association/unifmu**

# Implementing the model

The `resources/model.py` file defines the functional relationship between inputs and outputs of the FMU.

## Declaring inputs and outputs

By default, each input, output or parameter declared in the `modelDescription.xml` file is represented as attributes on the instance of the `Model` class.
For instance if a variable `a` is declared in the `modelDescription.xml` file, it an attribute of the same name should be declared in the `Model` class:

```xml
<ScalarVariable name="a" valueReference="0" variability="continuous" causality="input">
    <Real start="0.0" />
</ScalarVariable>
```

```python
def __init__(self) -> None:
    self.a = 0.0

    self.reference_to_attribute = {
        0: "a",
    }
```

The FMI C-API uses numerical indices rather than names to which variables to read or write to.
As such a mapping between the indices declared by the `valueReference` attribute of the xml and the attributes must be defined.
By default the mapping between a value reference and its corresponding Python attribute is defined by adding an entry to the `reference_to_attributes` variable of the `Model` class.

## Defining the behavior

The `Model` class declares several methods that can be used to define the behavior of the FMU.
Methods prefixed with `fmi2` mirror the methods declared in the C-API defined by the FMI specification.

For instance, to update an output `b` to be twice the value of `a` the `fmi2DoStep` method could be defined as:

```python
def fmi2DoStep(self, current_time, step_size, no_step_prior):
    self.b = self.a * 2
    return Fmi2Status.ok
```

# Testing and debugging the model

The `model.py` is _plain_ Python code, which means we can test the model using test cases and debugging tools.
A small test program can be written and placed in the `model.py` the slave as seen below:

```python
if __name__ == "__main__":
    m = Model()

    assert m.a == 0.0
    assert m.b == 0.0

    m.a = 1.0
    m.fmiDoStep(0.0, 1.0, False)

    assert m.b == 2.0
```

The program can be executed in your IDE with or from the command line by running the `resources/model.py` script.

# Runtime dependencies

The environment that invokes the Python code must provide all the dependencies, otherwise the simulation will fail when instantiating or simulation the model.
For instance, if the `resources/model.py` imports a third-party package such as `numpy`

```python
import numpy as np
```

this must also be available to the Python interpreter specified by the `launch.toml` file, in this case the system's `python3` interpreter:

```toml
linux = ["python3", "backend.py"]
```

One way to address a missing dependency is to install using package manager such as `pip`

```
python3 -m pip install numpy
```

**Any Python FMU generated UniFMU requires the `protobuf` package.
The easiest way to install this is using pip:**

```
python3 -m pip install protobuf==5.27.3
```

The correct version can be seen at the top of python files generated by the protocol buffer compiler. Example: fmi2_messages_pb2.py

# File structure

An overview of the role of each file is provided in the tree below:

```python
📦model
 ┣ 📂binaries
 ┃ ┣ 📂darwin64
 ┃ ┃ ┗ 📜unifmu.dylib       # binary for macOS
 ┃ ┣ 📂linux64
 ┃ ┃ ┗ 📜unifmu.so          # binary for Linux
 ┃ ┗ 📂win64
 ┃ ┃ ┗ 📜unifmu.dll         # binary For Windows
 ┣ 📂resources
 ┃ ┣ 📂schemas
 ┃ ┃ ┗ 📜unifmu_fmi2_pb2.py # schema defining structure of messages sent over RPC
 ┃ ┣ 📜backend.py           # receives messages and dispatched function calls to "model.py"
 ┃ ┣ 📜launch.toml*         # specifies command used to start FMU
 ┃ ┗ 📜model.py*            # implementation of FMU
 ┗ 📜modelDescription.xml*  # definition of inputs and outputs
```

\* denotes files that would typically be modified by the implementor of the FMU
